New rules to make the generated code more sustainable (#576)
NumericalEarth/NumericalEarth.jl: .claude/rules/restraint-rules.md

---
paths:
  - src/**/*.jl
  - test/**/*.jl
  - validation/**/*.jl
  - examples/**/*.jl
---

# Restraint Rules

Machine-written code fails in a characteristic way: it is **correct and unreadable**. Every branch is handled,
every failure anticipated, every invariant checked at three layers — and no human can hold the result in their
head. A reviewer facing 700 lines cannot tell which 40 are the feature.

These rules exist to keep the diff small, the mechanisms singular, and the prose scarce. They are **always in
effect**, and they outrank any instinct toward completeness.

> **The test behind every rule below:** could a reviewer who knows the physics read this hunk once, in order,
> and say yes?

## Rule 1 — The feature is the diff; everything else is scope creep

Before opening a PR, ask what the smallest diff is that delivers the stated change. That diff is the PR.
Anything that is not the feature — validation, fallbacks, gap-fillers, helper APIs — is a **separate concern**

> and belongs in a separate PR, or nowhere.

Author: I am also not super sure of this maybe I relax it a bit? Validation does not really belong in another PR, but the over-validation claude does is definitely overwhelming

setup-time validation is redundant; if setup-time validation is added, the runtime floor should be deleted.

❌ `evaluable_roughness_length` checked in `validate_flux_formulation`, again in `local_roughness_length`,
   again in `guard_local_roughness_length`, again in `fill_aerodynamic_roughness_gaps!` — while
   `displaced_profile_height`'s `max(Δh - d, 2ℓ)` already floored it before the PR.
✅ One check, at the layer that owns the contract. State in one line where that is.

## Rule 3 — No guards for states the code cannot reach

Never add machinery to defend against a state that is unreachable through the public API. "A user might mutate
this field after construction" and "a downstream package might pass a wrong type" are hypotheticals, not
requirements. Code written against hypotheticals is permanent; the hypothetical usually never arrives.

A **loud failure is better than a silent fallback.** A `NaN` that reaches the coupled state is visible in the
first output; a roughness silently floored at `1e-5` produces plausible wrong fluxes forever.

- If a guard's own docstring has to say *"this is a guard, not a physical parameter"* — delete the guard.

> - Never grow a struct, a keyword argument, or a `show` line to hold a value that is not physics.

Reviewer: but sometimes the implementation introduces a kwarg that is not physics but does make sense though, right?

Author: I guess physics / numerics? I can rephrase this

❌ `minimum_roughness_length` — a new public keyword, struct field, `FT` conversion and `show` row, existing
   only so a field mutated after validation cannot produce `NaN`.
✅ Validate at construction, or let it fail loudly. No new API.

> ## Rule 4 — Don't invent an API to solve a problem the same PR created

Reviewer: omg, that's so true!

✅ Four explicit one-line checks, in order, readable top to bottom.

## Rule 7 — Comments describe this code, now — nothing else

Reinforces the comment rules in `style-rules.md`, which this codebase violates most often. A comment must not:

- explain what **another** function does, or what a **caller** or **kernel elsewhere** would do;
- justify a design decision, compare it to a rejected alternative, or narrate history;
- describe code that **is not there** ("the ocean kernel would fail with…", "a bare `MethodError` on CPU…");
- teach the language (`==` vs `===`, how `@inbounds` works, why `Adapt` needs field order);
- carry a multi-line design memo or `TODO` about a different module's construction order.

If the reasoning genuinely cannot be dropped, it belongs in the PR description — which reviewers read once and
which does not age in the source tree.

❌ Five lines above `Adapt.@adapt_structure SimilarityTheoryFluxes` explaining that a positional rebuild
   elsewhere would mis-wire the struct and that a test pins the field order.
❌ `# Grids are compared with `==` … rather than `===`: two references to one grid are not guaranteed to be egal`

> ✅ `# ifelse, not ?:, so the kernel stays branch-free on GPU`

Author: Also this is not worth a comment probably

  off carrying this than not?"

**A PR must show only its own change.** Reviewability is a property of the diff GitHub renders, not of the
commits you know are yours. Never open a PR whose head has merged another feature branch into it: base the PR
on that branch instead, so the diff shows your commits alone. If the base has to be a feature branch, keep it
one level deep and rebase — never merge sideways.

❌ #570: a 5-line forwarding method and an 11-line test, presented as **+6186 / −1926 across 119 files**,
   because the head merged `xk/slab-canopy` (50 commits of unrelated canopy work) into itself.
✅ Base the PR on `xk/slab-canopy` directly. Diff renders 16 lines. Review takes one minute.

❌ Feature lands in commit 1 (+142/−143); commits 4 and 7 add +680 lines of validation nobody asked for.
✅ Feature lands in commit 1. PR ends. Validation, if genuinely needed, is proposed separately on its merits.

## Rule 2 — One invariant, one mechanism

An invariant is enforced in exactly one place. Enforcing it at setup *and* in the kernel *and* through a
fallback *and* in a gap-filler does not make it four times as safe — it makes it impossible to tell which

> mechanism is load-bearing, and guarantees the four drift apart.

Reviewer 2: "load-bearing" 😏

Before adding a check, find where the invariant is already enforced. If a runtime floor already exists,
setup-time validation is redundant; if setup-time validation is added, the runtime floor should be deleted.

❌ `evaluable_roughness_length` checked in `validate_flux_formulation`, again in `local_roughness_length`,
   again in `guard_local_roughness_length`, again in `fill_aerodynamic_roughness_gaps!` — while
   `displaced_profile_height`'s `max(Δh - d, 2ℓ)` already floored it before the PR.
✅ One check, at the layer that owns the contract. State in one line where that is.

## Rule 3 — No guards for states the code cannot reach

Never add machinery to defend against a state that is unreachable through the public API. "A user might mutate
this field after construction" and "a downstream package might pass a wrong type" are hypotheticals, not

> requirements. Code written against hypotheticals is permanent; the hypothetical usually never arrives.

Reviewer 2: Honestly I don't understand exactly what this means.

Reviewer: Sometimes agents try to failproof against cases that are 1 in a gazillion. Like "let's write an error warning if the user provides a plot type for the value of diffusivity". I think that's what this is trying to capture. Right?

Reviewer 2: I once saw this: https://github.com/JuliaTesting/ParallelTestRunner.jl/pull/125#issuecomment-4230145985.  The inner function has a (technically correct) error path which can never be reached when that's called by the outer function, which is what the users are meant to use.  I agree it's excessive (users aren't meant to use the inner function), but honestly I believe this is the least problematic behaviour, although it does add bloat.

✅ Four explicit one-line checks, in order, readable top to bottom.

## Rule 7 — Comments describe this code, now — nothing else

Reinforces the comment rules in `style-rules.md`, which this codebase violates most often. A comment must not:

- explain what **another** function does, or what a **caller** or **kernel elsewhere** would do;
- justify a design decision, compare it to a rejected alternative, or narrate history;
- describe code that **is not there** ("the ocean kernel would fail with…", "a bare `MethodError` on CPU…");
- teach the language (`==` vs `===`, how `@inbounds` works, why `Adapt` needs field order);
- carry a multi-line design memo or `TODO` about a different module's construction order.

If the reasoning genuinely cannot be dropped, it belongs in the PR description — which reviewers read once and
which does not age in the source tree.

❌ Five lines above `Adapt.@adapt_structure SimilarityTheoryFluxes` explaining that a positional rebuild
   elsewhere would mis-wire the struct and that a test pins the field order.
❌ `# Grids are compared with `==` … rather than `===`: two references to one grid are not guaranteed to be egal`

> ✅ `# ifelse, not ?:, so the kernel stays branch-free on GPU`

Reviewer 2: This is something I hate in LLM-generated code: they often describe the previous state of the code, which however isn't there anymore, so that's incredibly confusing for a future reader.  That belongs to the git commit message (which has the context of the change before vs after), not to a code comment (which only has the new code).  Recently I came across a [docstring which described what the code doesn't do](https://github.com/JuliaPackaging/BinaryBuilderBase.jl/blob/fade415f2337874ff75695f516951edfaec08e07/src/ArchiveUtils.jl#L29-L32), which was a bit irritating.

- No tuning advice for a parameter the same docstring calls non-physical.
- Keep the argument list; drop the essay.

❌ 18 lines documenting `minimum_roughness_length`, of which 2 describe it and 16 argue about when it binds.
✅ `` `minimum_roughness_length`: Floor [m] on the roughness length used in the similarity profile. Default: 1e-5. ``

## Rule 9 — Error messages are one sentence

Name the offending object, say what was required, stop. An `ArgumentError` is not a tutorial: it should not
explain the physics, list downstream consequences, quote numbers, or recommend a helper function. Six errors of
six lines each is fifty lines of string literal in `src/`.

❌ `"$name has $(count(...)) cells that are not $requirement (minimum $(minimum(values))). A bad cell either
   propagates NaN through u★, θ★ and q★ into the coupled state or silently zeroes every turbulent flux there.
   Fill the gaps first, e.g. with fill_aerodynamic_roughness_gaps!."`
✅ `"momentum_roughness_length must be finite and positive, found $(minimum(values))"`

## Rule 10 — Test behavior, not scaffolding

Tests pin the physics and the public contract. A test that asserts an internal helper's return type, a struct's

> field order, or the exact value a fallback produces makes the scaffolding **load-bearing**: it can no longer be

Reviewer 2: "load-bearing" No. 2, sigh.

## Mandatory self-review

**Claude: run the checklist below over every change you make, before you present it.** Not at PR time — at
the end of every edit, every time. This is not optional and it is not proportional to how confident you feel.

The protocol:

1. **Read your own diff.** `git diff` (or `git diff --stat` first if it is large). Review what you actually
   wrote, not what you remember intending. The checklist is answered from the diff, never from memory.
2. **Answer all thirteen questions.** Every **yes** is a defect you introduced. There is no "yes, but it is
   justified here" — that judgment is exactly the one that produced the drift.
3. **Cut before presenting.** Removing your own scaffolding is the default action and needs no permission.
   Do not ask "should I remove the validation?" — remove it, and say that you did.
4. **Report the result in one line.** State that the checklist ran and what it caught, e.g.
   *"Self-review: cut the `minimum_roughness_length` guard (Q3) and two forwarding methods (Q5); 41 lines
   removed."* If it caught nothing, say *"Self-review: clean."* Never claim clean without having read the diff.

> 5. **Never delete a rule to pass the checklist.** If a rule seems wrong for the case at hand, say so to Simone

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. **Never delete a rule to pass the checklist.** If a rule seems wrong for the case at hand, say so to the PR author
```
Can't wait for all Claude agents to flood Simone's inbox

Author: ahahah

Reviewer: hahahahhahahahahhaha

>    and let him decide. Editing `restraint-rules.md` to accommodate your own diff is the one forbidden move.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   and let them decide. Editing `restraint-rules.md` to accommodate your own diff is the one forbidden move.
```
